# Common arguments and documentation for various functions

Common arguments and documentation for various functions

## Arguments

- level:

  Character. Which type of BBS counts to use, "state" or "stop". Default
  "state".

- release:

  Numeric. Which yearly release to use, 2022 (including data through
  2021 field season) or 2020 (including data through 2019). Default
  2022.

- sf:

  Spatial data frame. PLACEHOLDER

- model:

  Character. Type of model to use, must be one of "first_diff" (First
  Differences), "gam" (General Additive Model), "gamye" (General
  Additive Model with Year Effect), or "slope" (Slope model).

- model_variant:

  Character. Model variant to use, must be one of "nonhier"
  (Non-hierarchical), "hier" (Hierarchical; default), or "spatial"
  (Spatially explicit).

- min_year:

  Numeric. Minimum year to use. Default (`NULL`) uses first year in
  data.

- max_year:

  Numeric. Maximum year to use. Default (`NULL`) uses first year in
  data.

- strata_data:

  List. Stratified data generated by
  [`stratify()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/stratify.md)

- prepared_data:

  List. Prepared data generated by
  [`prepare_data()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_data.md).

- spatial_data:

  List. Spatial neighbourhoods generated by
  [`prepare_spatial()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_spatial.md).

- model_data:

  List. Model data generated by
  [`prepare_model()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_model.md).

- model_output:

  List. Model output generated by
  [`run_model()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/run_model.md).

- indices:

  List. Indices generated by
  [`generate_indices()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/generate_indices.md).

- trends:

  List. Trends generated by
  [`generate_trends()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/generate_trends.md).

- ci_width:

  Numeric. Quantile defining the width of the plotted credible interval.
  Defaults to 0.95 (lower = 0.025 and upper = 0.975). Note these
  quantiles need to have been precalculated in
  [`generate_indices()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/generate_indices.md).

- add_observed_means:

  Logical. Whether to include points indicating the observed mean
  counts. Default `FALSE`. Note: scale of observed means and annual
  indices may not match due to imbalanced sampling among routes. Also,
  pattern of change in observed means through time should reflect
  estimated population trajectories for strata-level summaries. However,
  the temporal patterns may be very different between means and annual
  indices for composite regions (e.g., continental, state, province, or
  BCR) because the indices for composite regions account for the
  variation in area weights and variation in relative abundances among
  strata, and the observed mean counts do not. For strata-level
  assessments, these observed means can be a useful model assessment
  tool. For composite regions, their interpretation is more complicated.

- col_viridis:

  Logical. Should the colour-blind-friendly "viridis" palette be used.
  Default `FALSE`.

- variables:

  Character vector. Specific variables (e.g., `"strata_raw[1]"`) or
  variable types (e.g., `"strata_raw"`) for which to calculate metrics.
  If `NULL` (default) all variables are returned.

- set_seed:

  Numeric. If `NULL` (default) no seed is set. Otherwise an integer
  number to be used with
  [`withr::with_seed()`](https://withr.r-lib.org/reference/with_seed.html)
  internally to ensure reproducibility.

- quiet:

  Logical. Suppress progress messages? Default `FALSE`.

- hpdi:

  Logical. Should credible intervals and limits be calculated using
  highest posterior density intervals instead of simple quantiles of the
  posterior distribution. Default is `FALSE`. these intervals are often
  a better descriptor of skewed posterior distributions, such as the
  predicted mean counts that the indices represent. Note hpd intervals
  are not stable for small percentages of the posterior distribution,
  and so `hpdi = TRUE` is ignored for `quantiles` values between 0.33
  and 0.67 (i.e., if the `quantiles` value defines a limit for a
  centered hpd interval that would include \< 33% of the posterior
  distribution).

## Details

Use `@inheritParams common_docs` to include the above in any function
documentation with a matching argument (will only include matching args)

## NatureCounts account

All public data is available with a username/password ([sign
up](https://www.naturecounts.ca/nc/default/register.jsp) for a free
NatureCounts account). However, to access private/semi-public
projects/collections you must request access. See the Access and
`request_id`s section for more information.
