# Prepare model parameters

Calculate and format the prepared data for use in modelling. Different
parameters are definied for different types of models (see
[`?bbs_models`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/bbs_models.md)
for a list of models included in bbsBayes2).

## Usage

``` r
prepare_model(
  prepared_data,
  model,
  model_variant = "hier",
  model_file = NULL,
  use_pois = FALSE,
  heavy_tailed = TRUE,
  n_knots = NULL,
  basis = "mgcv",
  calculate_nu = FALSE,
  calculate_log_lik = FALSE,
  calculate_cv = FALSE,
  cv_k = 10,
  cv_fold_groups = "obs_n",
  cv_omit_singles = TRUE,
  use_likelihood = TRUE,
  set_seed = NULL,
  quiet = FALSE
)
```

## Arguments

- prepared_data:

  List. Prepared data generated by
  [`prepare_data()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_data.md)
  (if `model-variant` is not `spatial`) or
  [`prepare_spatial()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_spatial.md)
  (if `model_variant` is `"spatial"`).

- model:

  Character. Type of model to use, must be one of "first_diff" (First
  Differences), "gam" (General Additive Model), "gamye" (General
  Additive Model with Year Effect), or "slope" (Slope model).

- model_variant:

  Character. Model variant to use, must be one of "nonhier"
  (Non-hierarchical), "hier" (Hierarchical; default), or "spatial"
  (Spatially explicit).

- model_file:

  Character. Optional location of a custom Stan model file to use.

- use_pois:

  Logical. Whether to use an Over-Dispersed Poisson model (`TRUE`) or an
  Negative Binomial model (`FALSE`; default).

- heavy_tailed:

  Logical. Whether extra-Poisson error distributions should be modelled
  as a t-distribution, with heavier tails than the standard normal
  distribution. Default `TRUE`. Recent results suggest this is best even
  though it requires much longer convergence times. Can only be set to
  `FALSE` with Poisson models (i.e. `use_pois = TRUE`).

- n_knots:

  Numeric. Number of knots for "gam" and "gamye" models

- basis:

  Character. Basis function to use for GAM smooth, one of "original" or
  "mgcv". Default is "original", the same basis used in Smith and
  Edwards 2020. "mgcv" is an alternate that uses the "tp" basis from the
  package mgcv (also used in brms, and rstanarm). If using the "mgcv"
  option, the user may want to consider adjusting the prior
  distributions for the parameters and their precision.

- calculate_nu:

  Logical. Whether to calculate the `nu` parameter as a factor of
  `gamma(2, 0.1)`. Default `FALSE`.

- calculate_log_lik:

  Logical. Whether to calculate point-wise log-likelihood of the data
  given the model. Default `FALSE`.

- calculate_cv:

  Logical. Whether to use bbsBayes2' cross validation. Note this is
  **experimental**. See Details.

- cv_k:

  Numeric. The number of K folds to include (only relevant if
  `calculate_cv = TRUE`). Default 10. Note this is **experimental**.

- cv_fold_groups:

  Character. The data column to use when determining the grouping level
  of the observations to be assigned to different fold groups. Must be
  one of `obs_n` (default) or `routes` (only relevant if
  `calculate_cv = TRUE`). Note this is **experimental**. See the [models
  article](https://bbsBayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/articles/models.html)
  for more details.

- cv_omit_singles:

  Logical. Whether to omit test groups with no replication (only
  relevant if `calculate_cv = TRUE`). Default `TRUE.` See the [models
  article](https://bbsBayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/articles/models.html)
  for more details.

- use_likelihood:

  Logical. If set to FALSE generates prior predictions i.e., ignores the
  likelihood of the count data. Default TRUE

- set_seed:

  Numeric. If `NULL` (default) no seed is set. Otherwise an integer
  number to be used with
  [`withr::with_seed()`](https://withr.r-lib.org/reference/with_seed.html)
  internally to ensure reproducibility.

- quiet:

  Logical. Suppress progress messages? Default `FALSE`.

## Value

A list of prepared data.

- `model_data` - list of data formatted for use in Stan modelling

- `init_values` - list of initialization parameters

- `folds` - a vector of k-fold groups each observation is assigned to
  (if `calculate_cv = TRUE`), or `NULL`

- `meta_data` - meta data defining the analysis

- `meta_strata` - data frame listing strata meta data

- `raw_data` - data frame of summarized counts used to create
  `model_data` (just formatted more nicely)

## Details

There are ways you can customize the model run. You can supply a custom
`model_file` created with the
[`copy_model_file()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/copy_model_file.md)
function and then edited manually.

You can edit or overwrite the initialization values (`init_values`) in
the output of `prepare_model()` to customize the values supplied to
[`cmdstanr::sample()`](https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/reference/model-method-sample.html).
In previous versions of bbsBayes2, these initial values were specific to
the model and model version. Since version 1.1.3, the initial values
supplied by defaul in `prepare_model()` are a single value
`$init_values = 1`, which This initializes all parameters randomly
between `-1` and `1`⁠ on the unconstrained parameter space. You can
change these initial values and supply alternate initialization values
in any way that
[`cmdstanr::sample()`](https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/reference/model-method-sample.html)
accepts the `init` argument, using the `init_alternate` argument in
[`run_model()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/run_model.md).

To implement bbsBayes2' version of cross validation, set
`calculate_cv = TRUE`. You can set up your own system for cross
validation by modifying the `folds` list-item in the output of
`prepare_model()`. **Note this is considered experimental.**

See the [models
article](https://bbsBayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/articles/models.html) for
more advanced examples and explanations.

## See also

Other Data prep functions:
[`prepare_data()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_data.md),
[`prepare_spatial()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/prepare_spatial.md),
[`stratify()`](https://bbsbayes.github.io/bbsBayes2/reference/stratify.md)

## Examples

``` r
s <- stratify(by = "bbs_cws", sample_data = TRUE)
#> Using 'bbs_cws' (standard) stratification
#> Using sample BBS data...
#> Using species Pacific Wren (sample data)
#> Filtering to species Pacific Wren (7221)
#> Stratifying data...
#>   Combining BCR 7 and NS and PEI...
#>   Renaming routes...
p <- prepare_data(s)
pm <- prepare_model(p, model = "first_diff", model_variant = "hier")
```
